# Collectivism is Profitable

## Springboard

[Hacker news article](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=27225739) led to
[Five Oregon counties vote to leave state](https://www.upi.com/Top_News/US/2021/05/19/Oregon-Idaho-Donald-Trump-Joe-Biden/3341621450876/)

## Notion

A [comment](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=27226645) struck me. The
argument in the comment is well-worn. Collectivists in politics often use it to
argue with why the 'red' should not _want_ separate from the 'blue'.

This 'profitability' fact strikes me as being the core tension of the
Collectivist/Individualist duality. It is simply true that organisms of all
stripes are more profitable. Cells are more profitable than organelles. Organs
are more profitable than cells, etc... It goes all the way up to individuals and
grouping social structures.

That is why these collections exist in nature: they are profitable. For a
variety of explainable mechanisms. One is that it allows specialization, and the
magic of
[comparative advantage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparative_advantage). My
skin cells and liver cells each are better off _as cells_ by being 'members' of
kidney and skin, which are better off as organs, by being a member of my body. I
am better off as an individual by being a member of a social group. Smaller
social groups benefit in banding together to be part of larger social groups,
etc....

Yet the individuals persist as well. There can be no 'collection' without an
'individual'. Individuals and Collections exist simultaneously, by definition.
There is a sort of never-ending natural tension between collection and
individual. Same as any dichotomy.

All dichotomies are false, in the sense that they are mere made up labels along
arbitrary axis. All maps are false, but maps are non-the-less useful to
understand and explore the land. Map making is powerful.

There are still free-living cells in nature. The economic advantage of
collectivism does not totally dominate. However, it must be recognized that
collections _do_ provide an advantage. As I observe the natural landscape I see
a great many 'higher order' organsisms. In general these collectives thrive and
are successful, and tend to dominate.

The only _real_ existential threat to the collective is a bigger collective. I
note that at some level _collectives themselves_ become 'individuals' of a
higher collective. So the collective at one level, becomes the individual of the
next. I lose my individuality as I become a member of a social group. The social
group loses its collectiveness as it becomes a member of a larger group. Etc...

## Collections of Humans

It is interesting to note that humans, being blessed with conscious thought, can
in some sense _choose_ which end of the individual/collective dichotomy to focus
on. Indeed, perhaps to go so far as to _identify_ as an individual, or a member
of a group.

Thus we get back to politics. The struggle of human individuals and collectives.

A side-twist with human/society dichotomy is that human 'individuals' can
simultainiously belong to multiple social 'collectives'. This makes the
individual/collective 'math' a bit harder in that it is multi-dimensional just
as '42' is simultainiously a member of the natural and complex numbers.

