# Memes and Human Psychology

This is part two of what is turning into a series. It started from
["The Danger of Following"](https://mjt.dev/blog/the_danger_of_following/) for
those interested in origins.

As I take inventory of my mind, I find a hodgepodge of ideas and motivations.

I am largely ignorant of why I love the things I love, hate the things I hate.

I'm a good reasoner, so I can _create_ any number of _reasons_ why I like X and
hate Y. But ultimately _there are no, and can never be answers_ to my 'core'
loves and hates. As I explore deeper and deeper, reasons themselves loose their
power. The loss of the power of reasoning, itself can be explained reasonably,
so I'm not disturbed by this. I will just note that all tools have their limits.

That doesn't mean it isn't worthwhile to reflect on the things that 'ultimately'
motivate me. To ask oneself the question of if the rabbit is still worth
chasing.

Perhaps more interestingly though is to approach the task in a novel way.

Therefore I ask: What is the rabbit I'm chasing, itself chasing? Not for the
answer, but for insights the exercise brings.

```
"Plans are useless, but planning indispensable" --- Eisenhower
```

## First Motivation(s)

There is a sort of base set of human motivations. Pain/Pleasure is perhaps the
most basic duo that all animals with neurons share.

What does pain want? What does pleasure want?

Pain might be chasing the avoidance of harm.

Pleasure might be chasing something of benefit.

I have no clue what pain itself thinks it's chasing. It is perhaps not even a
well-formed English sentence. However, it is still useful to think about. I'll
let pain borrow my neurons for a bit to ponder on itself.

I _innately_ don't like pain. I don't need a _reason_ to not like pain.

I seek to avoid 'harm' because that is what _pain_ appears to be avoiding. If I
had no sense of pain, avoiding harm would be of little interest to me. I chase
bringing an end to pain, and so am forced to chase bringing an end to harm.

As my mind developes, the more I embrace chasing the avoidance of harm directly,
somewhat forgetting about pain. These days, I'd say I've fully _adopted_
avoiding harm, chasing the avoidance of pain. I've been 'conned' into avoiding
harm.

So what is harm-avoidance chasing?

Maybe a good imagining would be that harm-avoidance is "chasing keeping the
structure intact".

And on, and on....

One builds ever higher towers of _useful abstractions_. Some might be tempted to
call these levels of development. This implies a direction, and is a dark hole.

Let's cut to the chase.

## Go!

An arrow points clearly to a direction to follow: The 'follow the rabbit' arrow
itself. Chase, chasing. :)

Maybe it is because humans are preditors my mind follows this path. I don't
think a prey animal would ever develop an intellect with similar qualities as a
human. Look at a ranking of living things by IQ. Note the distinct lack of
plants, and prey animals. I'm not going to bother explaining in detail why this
is so. I'm not saying it is inherently 'better' to be predator or prey. Black
needs white, up needs down, inside needs outside. Intelligence is needed more by
preditors, photons are needed more by white. Nature breaks symmetry and gives
gifts in unequal measure.

I feel the need to continue chasing, pursuing all manor of things, and indeed
increase my abilities to chase all the better as my time goes on. I'll assume
this as a given for now. Part of the innate nature of any sufficiently
sophisticated mind able to comprehend itself. If there are intelligent aliens, I
think we can safely bet they hunt.

## What does chasing itself want?

I note that the thought of chasing brings a _positive_ emotion. It is something
like the opposite of pain. Chasing appears to desire that which is tasty or
advantageous.

Interestingly, chasing is a higher-level abstraction and unlike pain needs a
thing defined for it. Chasing needs to know what the _good_ thing is. Pain has
an internal focus and is self-contained. Chasing is external, and demands an
outside world.

So chasing is chasing some form of external good thing. One doesn't think of
chasing bad things, or chasing by standing still.

The definition of what is good is quite powerful, since it leads the entire
being in its pursuit.

What does good want?

Let's try on for size the idea that good wants the absence of pain.

Since pain is internal, this seems like a workable definition of good. Good
isn't outside, it is merely the lack of presense of something bad (pain), which
is internal.

Nature has been clever though, and understands that survival for predatory
animals depends on them chasing and eating the outside world.

I have internal hunger _pain_, and _remove_ this pain by chasing a rabbit in the
outside world and consuming it. My satisfaction and reward is the _lack_ of pain
I feel with a full belly.

## Good and Evil

There is a lot of purposeful confusion about morality (the 'sense' of what is
good and bad). It is amusing to think that so few people spend the time to
explore this fundamental idea. Indeed, most education and training in these
areas I find do more to deceive than they do to educate. The information is _so
bad_ in fact, that simple ignorance, is not a sufficient reason for its
continued existence.

```
"Give me a child until he is 7 and I will show you the man." --- Aristotle
```

If you give me the power to define good and bad for you, I have gained the keys
to your soul. I can train you as I would train a dog. Imagine a human pet.
Imagine the lengths one might go to acquire such a marvel.

Humans are apex preditors. We are the scarriest, meanest, baddest mother-fuckers
of all time. And there are _billions_ of us. One does NOT want to get in the way
of humanity. Humanity would eat you alive, and smile while doing it.

We are so good at predation, that hunting mere animals is no longer a useful
skill. I buy my meat from Walmart. It is delivered at my command on my doorstep,
inside a thoughtfully crafted plastic and styrofoam container (_better_ than a
silver platter).

Humans no longer hunt animals, but we are _innately_ hunters. What prize is
worthy of the hunt today?

In my mind this answers why the ideas around morality are so _exceptionally_ and
_intentionally_ poorly transmitted, compared to say mathematics, or basket
weaving.

Morality, and morality-manipulation is the space for hunting humans.

Humans are _hardwired_ to go after what they think of as good, away from what is
bad. Humans no longer control other humans by _force_ (physical slavery). That
is dangerous and difficult. Much better to 'enslave' a human by playing with
their internal 'sense' of morality.

It is important to recognize that this is not a new idea. Aristotle had this
thought over two _thousand_ years ago. The words I shared above is a _famous_
well-known quote. Yet I know almost no-one who is concerned enough to question
what morality is, much less, ask the question of why they have adopted the moral
stance they have. They are lambs to the slaughter.

Let me state that I do _NOT_ think of this as some sort of dark evil conspiracy.

This state of affairs has lasted as long as humans have been around to note it.
It appears to be a _natural_ part of being a human. Just as a human has a set of
eyes, and a liver, they have a lack of wings, and an ingrained _inability_ to
desire to understand morality. As odd as it sounds, nature just has made this
'inability' a part of being a human.

And when one thinks of it in evolutionary terms, why not? As long as those
humans with this inability continue to thrive and pass their genes (and memes)
from one generation to the next, that is reason enough for it to continue.

The modern cow is by all accounts quite stupid and weak compared to its wild
ancestor. However, the cow, cleverly, made the bargin to live a peaceful, and by
all reasonable standards, safe, well-fed and secure existence. All the cow has
to do in exchange is produce meat, milk, hides, etc... which can be harvested.
The cow happily does this without care or burden, as a apple-tree produces an
apple. The cow has done _quite well_ in terms of reproductive success. Sure it
lost some unneeded things, as one might take off a shirt on a hot day. One can
view this as merely 'offloading' the burdens of living in the wild, onto
humanity, who has taken up this burden willingly.

Being a human pet is not a poor or miserable life compared to the alternative. I
think a large amount of humans would _willingly_ make the choice, if presented,
to be a 'human pet'.

Look to how many humans love and care for their cats and dogs. I sense that
there are many who would willingly give up the _burden_ of the natural struggle
to be so pampered. What is the occasional unwanted 'belly rub' compared to the
horrors and struggle of living in the wild?

The pet/human relationship is beneficial to both parties. It is incorrect to
think of one as being 'better' than the other. It is symbiotic. It is the same
relationship as one has with one's cells/organs. In exchange for giving up
'living in the wild', the cells/organs came together to from an 'organism'. A
collection of collections, cells themselves having 'organelles' and themselves
forming organs, nature really likes this 'collection of individuals' trick.

Organs are in some sense 'subordinate', but the trade is beneficial to both the
organism and the organ. I look after and love my organs. Indeed the love is so
great that I have a sense that I _am_ my collection of organs, with some being a
bit more important than others. I will not give up the organ of my brain
lightly, and would probably make the sacrifice of a 'lesser' organ in its place,
but I would not do so happily. I love and care for all my body and other
_possessions_ as best as I am able.

It is undoubtedly true, that there are a clever few, who recognize the power
this 'lack of awareness' of the 'power of understanding morality' brings. There
is no end of con artists, marketers, and megalomaniacs. However, those groups of
'human human hunter' merely take advantage of a situation that they find exists.
A fox finding a rabbit in the woods isn't responsible for _creating_ the rabbit.

It is _open knowledge_ that this 'weakness', this willingness to be 'human prey'
or perhaps better thought of as 'willing human pet' exists. It can be 'fixed'
easily and some do, yet it has persisted for millennia in the bulk of the human
population.

There appears to be a higher-level cause of this persistent lack of awareness to
look towards. All birds have wings. Not all birds fly.

Humans have willingly split themselves into these two groups. Humans _give
themselves_ willingly, blindly, unconsciously, and unthinkingly, and this
benefits humanity in the whole.

It isn't that it is a conscious choice. My kidney didn't think too hard about if
it wanted the 'kidney life'. The cells that formed my kidney simply found
themselves being part of a kidney, unaware in fact that the kidney even exists,
much less the human organsim, much much less the 'social organism' of humans.

However if my kidney cells were brought to sentience and given the choice, it
isn't unreasonable to think that they might, upon careful consideration of all
alternatives, freely choose to self-subordinate, and become a member of the
'kidney', knowing full well the sacrifices of the self this involves.

## What does 'gullability' want?

I'm going to label this 'lack of the desire to think about morality' as the
willingness to become gullable. Which is to say the willingness to not put
thought into being led down a path. In other words to simply _trust_, and not
question the justifications, whatever path one happens to find oneself on.

Note that at some point it is impossible reason about all things forever. There
is a forced move to blindly trust whatever path one currently finds oneself on.
One is mathematically forced to give up the notion of proof at a certain level.
So it is important to recognize that all humans are forced into gullability at
some point. It isn't a matter of mental strength or IQ, it is simply that there
are
[real limits to knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems)
that one must recognize and accept.

However, humans as discussed above, are _particularly_ gullable. They have, to
put it crudely, been bred to be gullable.

### Gullability wants to belong

Note that I'm taking pains to express that there is no inherent evilness with
being gullable. The fact that gullability has a negative connotation merely
points to the tension to be found between the two sides of the coin. Sometimes
one wants to be the pet, sometimes one wants to be the owner. This is, as
discussed, simple human nature. Some will be attracted more to one side of that
duality, and some the other.

There is a _real difference_ between being a pet or being an owner. Some thought
and care in picking one's 'owner' or 'pet' is good.

Owners don't want 'bad' pets, and pets don't want 'bad' owners. There is room
for happy marriage, which means there is also room for unhappy marriage. The
trick, as is so often the case, is to find that happy marriage in the sea of
unhappy combinations. So one doesn't want to be _too_ gullable, but at some
point, it is best to accept that marriages _will_ happen. Better the marriages
happen with whatever partner one finds most attractive.


## Memes are Cool

(Most) Humans have moved quite a bit beyond the 'full belly' level of
sophistication.

The tools that got humans to this point, themselves have things they chase.
Perhaps the most high-level concept of this in the modern era is the idea of a
meme. A 'unit of cultural evolution' to put it in Richard Dawkin's (the coiner
of the word) terms which I think works well.

There is a lot of undeniable power in the concept of the meme. My brain has been
colonized by the meme of the meme.

The upshot of this is that I recognize I see the world through the lens of
memes. I can't _help_ but see religion and politics, and the current 'culture
wars' in memetic terms. It is the same as the color I see when I read the word
'purple'. Purple the color has invaded my brain and I can't unsee it.

Genes _famousely_ are selfish. So too are memes.

Memes though, unlike genes, are _manipulable_ by humans in 'real time'. I can't
(yet) change my genes with ease, but I can change my mind in the time it takes
to read a blog post. I can write a blog post to spread my memes in the hope they
are caught by the reader. Is it me or the meme that writes these words? A
distinction perhaps without much of a difference.

Changing a mind happens continually. We are in some sense wired to do it via our
language facilities, and are getting better and better at it over time.

We are so dedicated to it, that we spend _years_ of effort getting our children
to read. We force our _children_ to become _capable_ of being colonized by a
class of highly transmitable thought viruses and ideas.

Imagine if we did the same for genes? What parent would opt for putting their
child into years of painful and expensive adaptations, so that their cells would
have the capability of being infected and mutated by random genetic material in
the world?

The fact that humans _demand_ that their children can read is worth noting. The
meme of 'child education' is strong.

Strong memes, like strong genes are not often questioned. Who would question
having 20/20 eyesight or the ability to add numbers?

The 'reading' meme is well established at this point. What does the 'reading'
meme itself want I wonder?

And not just the reading meme, but all the memes inside my head. What do they
all want? For what they want will become what _I_ want, so this is no idle
question.

## _Imagining_ is useful

What would my friend like for their birthday? To answer that question I have to
perform the impossible task of _being_ my friend. Walking in their shoes, and
feeling what they feel is lacking.

To the degree I'm able to do this, I perform two feats: #1 I make my friend
happy. #2 I strengthen the bond with my friend, because I _proved_ that I
understand them enough to give them a good gift.

My memes are in a sense some of my closest friends. So close in fact that one
might reasonably say they _are_ me. Certainly just as much me as the cells in my
body, or my various organs including my brain are me.

Asking "what do my memes want?" is thus a kindness to them, and so in a way a
kindness to myself.

In reality I have no idea if my human friends are
[philisophical zombies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_zombie) or
not. They sure do _emotionally feel_ to me like me. It would make a certain kind
of reasonable sense, for them to be like me, with internal monologues and a deep
sense of 'I'. It makes the world a happier place to imagine them as sentient,
and since there is no way of knowing, I tend to do so as a practical shortcut.

With my 'meme friends' it is harder to imagine them as sentient. Perhaps this is
a failure of imagination on my part. However, I can still apply the same mental
trick as I do with my human friends, and attempt to empathize with them to the
degree I am able.

## What does the recipe for chicken soup want?

I can imagine all sorts of answers:

- To feed a human.
- To provide employment for chickens.
- To sell cookbooks

All of these I think are reasonable answers.

I note that this indicates that the recipe is tugged into different direcitions
as evolution changes the landscape. Before cookbooks were sold, chicken soup
existed. In a way, chicken soup helped _birth_ the cookbook, so one might say
that the cookbook was a kind of 'perfect gift' for the chicken soup: A gift it
itself didn't know it wanted, until after it was presented with it.

Chickens existed before chicken soup. It is reasonable to think that chicken
soup loves chickens. Hard to think of chicken soup without the bird in its name.
If chickens were to go extinct, so too would chicken soup. Therefore chicken
soup as a _direct_ interest in the world being full of chickens. Today a great
number of chickens owe their very existence, to the existence of chicken soup.

So chicken soup has a _variety_ of things it wants, and an ordering of those
wants. The wants change over time as the landscape changes. It itself _changes_
the very landscape it is a part of. Thus as the numerous memes of the world
pursue their wants, they effect and are effected by other memes. The life of a
meme is dynamic.

## Memes are biological

Biologists love the classify things. Give them names and definitions. This is
needed in order to study what is otherwise an incomprehensible mess, and further
the understanding of nature.

It is important to say here that the
[map is not the territory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Map%E2%80%93territory_relation).

It is easy to see this distinction with life-biology, as those involved have
cleverly adopted latin (a dead language) to name spots and features on the map.

For a biologist a 'dog' is :
Eukarya->Animalia->Chordata->Mammalia->Carnivora->Canidae->Canis->lupus

"C. l. familiaris" for short.

There have been attempts to bring memes into academic study. To date those
attempts have failed.

I note the failure is not because a better idea has replaced the meme.

As I read the failure, it is more due to lack of understanding and imagination.
The core problem IMHO with memes is the lack of agreed categories and names.
What are the meme species? Why is there no serious attempt at a taxonomic rank
of memes?

Perhaps the problem is because there already are such things: The dictionary,
the encyclopidea, the school of thought, etc....

Humans have been 'meme-ing at each other' for a long, long time. The meme
existed long before the name 'meme' was coined.
