Progress Report #61

I've survived another cycle around the great ball of fire

--- Where am I? ---

I am safe, healthy, and happy.

I have wealth and skillz that society values, so my immediate future is not in
danger.

I have friends I can depend on.

I am semi-engaged in a variety of interesting creative endeavors.

In short, life is good, and I'm enjoying being this Matt Taylor fellow.

--- Where am I going? ---

Art: Therapeutic/Insightful. Will continue the daily art practice.

Game Dev: Fun/Inspirational. Have come to realize that it is a _large_ subject.
I'm finding more joy in the individual parts vs the whole. Those can can do,
those who can't teach. I'm considering creating a tutorial blog/youtube series.

Writing: Loving. Perhaps it is the isolation. I've come to look at writing as a
way of honing my thoughts. Playing chess with myself. I plan on adding some
features to my website to make blogging easier, and thereby perhaps publish a
bit more.

Programming: Deliciously endlessly frustrating. Ever watch a cat tear into a
mouse-toy? Programming is like that for me. It is a pursuit I am _compelled_
deep within my being to follow.

Health: Slow and steady. I've plateaued on my wait-loss (losing, but _very_
slowly compared to last year). My kidneys aren't actively engaged in killing me
at the moment. It is a losing battle as my body ages. It would pay for me to pay
more attention to this, yet I find I have little time I wish to devote to it in
the moment. An ugly admission, but a truthful one. #notperfect

--- Thanks ---

I find a great deal of joy in my friends. I don't actively engage with you as
much as you deserve. Please forgive me for I am a fool, and so am compelled to
act foolishly. It is my nature. To those who have stick with me over the years,
I wish to express my sincere thanks. I hope to become a better person in this
regard.

🙏 💕
