Progress Report #63

Today is the only day

--- Coffee Therapy ---

I've given up trying to have any kind of normal schedule.

I started allowing myself unlimited coffee. If I'm not concerned when I'll go to
bed, no need to limit my intake.

Perhaps it was the coffee, perhaps it was the release of the unnecessary
constraint. For whatever reason, I feel quite happy with my new daily routine.

Currently I get to experience both sunrise and sunset with a great deal of
mental energy, which is a nice bonus.

--- How to find joy ---

There is this thing in AI called an adverserial neural network (GAN is the
search term).

I find this concept of 'using a knife to sharpen itself' to apply more broadly.

Every day I set myself two 'tasks' in my 'work'.

The first task is some kind of improvement to my 'art engine' software. Perhaps
a new rendering technique I'm trying to implement.

The second task is to create an image with the software I'm tinkering with that
I like.

They are both independent but 'tied together'. I can declare 'victory' on one or
the other, or most happily with both.

I think there is something to this way of working that unlocks oneself. I can
_lean_ one way or the other. Take solice in the art or the software, as the
frustrations of each take their toll, but usually at different times.

Perhaps there is no need to limit it to two, but I'm finding two is 'good
enough' to keep myself running and motivated. It is a neat mental hack.

--- Thanks ---

I hope that those who get this far into reading are doing well and enjoying the
precious moments of life. I wish the same for those who don't read these words,
but that is only for me to know. :)

💕 🙏
