Progress Report #66

Leaning into my weakness

--- Boredom is my Superpower ---

I don't finish.

I'm OK at finishing chores. To a large degree I automate them. Those that I don't automate I've created strong routines for, or I ignore until they become painful. Pain is the ultimate task-master. Finishing chores isn't an issue I'm concerned about.

The more artistic/creative things I'm _not_ finishing. That lack of 'finishing' in creative endeavours _is_ something I'm concerned with.

I repeat the same pattern:

I start things with high enthusiasm.
If it is a 'meaty' subject, I have a lot of fun for a while diving deep. I can keep this up for days, weeks, sometimes months.

Eventually though there comes a point where I get kind of 'stuck'.

The thing I'm building towards is no longer interesting. I slowly start to lose my original enthusiasm and the work becomes more of a grind, without any payoff.

I carry on in this state for too long, and get sort of 'burnt out'. 

The 'burnt out' state I think is unhelpful. It lasts days, sometimes weeks if I'm not aware, and I'd like to see myself spending less time here.

The thing is that the lack of enthusiasm 'creeps up' on me. I let myself go for far too long in the 'grind' state, because truth be told, the grind is also where all the 'action' is.

I don't mind the grind, but I do want that reward at the end as well. Life is too wonderful and full of awesome things to knowingly spend any extra amount of time not being enraptured by it.

--- A Way Forward---

I think I've hit upon a 'trick' that seems to be working.

The 'trick' is to realize that while I don't finish the project I'm working on...I often create lots of cool little bits and pieces I am quite happy with.

From now on I'm going to view my projects as more means to an end. The 'end' being the _little_ things I create along the way.

I will get better at capturing and bottling up the little things. Those things I can _re-use_. It is only when I _re-use_ a _part_ of something from a previous project that a thing is in any sense 'finished'. It is _good enough_ for me to want to use later. That is the only 'finished' for my creations that I'll ever know. I think this is a more helpful perspective to view the creative world from.

--- Self Permission ---

From this moment forward I give myself permission to abandon all projects at the slightest whiff of non-enthusiasm. All projects are transient studies, to be abandoned in place at any time.

I give myself permission to start an endless series of new fun projects that are all _studies_ of subjects that I find interest in.

I can capture anything from these projects and plunder them as I see fit. A neat thing retrieved from the ashes is the reward I seek.

--- Thanks ---

I remain grateful for the time I've been given. The beauty and wonder of this experience. To those reading this, I hope you are able to gain something from the experience I'm attempting to share. I'm grateful to have you be here with me.

💕 🙏

