Progress Report #67

Making things that make things

--- Game ---

The trick of allowing myself to throw away projects has paradoxilly led me to creating more things I like.

I now no longer feel the dreadful weight of 'what next?' on a large project, where the goal becomes less joyful and clear the longer the project goes on. The mistakes build, and the refactoring/reworking starts to dominate vs making forward progress.

A side-key was that I'm now more motivated to create small self-contained components/libraries that I know I will re-use in other projects.

It gives me joy to see this collection of libraries grow in a way that provides stability rather than complexity.

I also think it was a good move to delve into the RL/'tile-based' genre more directly.

The simple tile-based graphics and grid-systems are a fundamental element of video games. Coming to grips with these basics directly feels good, in that way that hard problems become easy, once one breaks it into parts that one can master a piece at a time.

I also find the stricter constraints lead to more creative freedom, and better story-telling possibilities. The closer one gets to a purely symbolic language, the more advantage one can take of the readers mind to 'render'. I can see myself going deep into pixel-art.

--- Health ---

I was feeling a bit headache-y and fuzzy-headed the first part of this week. 

I realized that I had been getting lax on the salt, and was not resting well.

Upped the salt, lowered the coffee and now I feel good.

Weird how getting enough salt has such dramatic affect, yet I can slip into deficiency without noticing.

For the record I also upped my daily multi-vitamin from 1/day to 2/day. Perhaps that helped as well.

If I was a better scientist I would of course only change the 1 variable instead of 3, but such is life, it is messy.

tldr; good sleep, electrolytes, vitamines FTW

--- Thanks ---
Feeling a bit off the first part of the week, and feeling so good today, makes me appreciate that one should enjoy the good times, and use them for all they are worth. I hope any reading these words are in some form of 'the good times' and if so, impore you to soak it all in. There is only this moment.

💕 🙏