# Creators Creators Creators

Why creators are pivotal to chase after, and the platforms that serve creators
best will win.

Steve Balmer had it right with his mantra
[Developers Developers Developers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vhh_GeBPOhs).

For the record I am far from a Microsoft/Balmer fanboy. However, props to Balmer
for getting it, and for providing endless hours of amusement with his chant.

As a developer myself it is nice to be appreciated, but I also saw the logic of
_why_ Balmer/Microsoft was so focused on developers.

Microsoft realized without full understanding of why, (after all they have no
sense of taste) a critical fact that was good enough to see them through. And
good enough is good enough.

```
The only problem with Microsoft is they just have no taste. They have absolutely no taste. And I don't mean that in a small way, I mean that in a big way, in the sense that they don't think of original ideas, and they don't bring much culture into their products.
--- Steve Jobs
```

Software Developers **Create** Software, and one wants creators creating stuff
on _their_ platform.

Apple, saw things a little differently. They went after 'creators' writ large.
They _accidentally_ IMHO attracted developers onto their platform, not because
they were focused on gaining developers, but because they were focused on
gaining _any_ digital creator.

For the record, Apple IMHO is losing to the degree it is shifting its focus to
consumers rather than creators. As a creator I have become decreasingly enthused
and at times downright frustrated with Apple over the years. As a consumer I
have been outraged by the walls of their garden. Apple is IMHO losing focus and
so declining presently. Their crown is ripe for the taking.

## Where are we today?

As I write these words humanity has largely solved the 'basics' of feeding and
caring for humans.

There are no more natural causes that kill humans in large proportions on any
regular basis. Politics (human choice) is by far the only reason any human goes
without food/clothing/shelter/care/entertainment/education (all the 'goods' of
life) at this point.

Today, humans decide how humans live and die, not nature.

That is a big historical shift. It is exciting, and it is terrifying. Humanity
has bootstrapped itself and is now running free, on its own, in a direction
nobody can guess. Our childhood is over. It is fully up to us where we will go
from here.

## Why Chase Creators?

As humans have 'broken' from nature the rules have changed. Human survival no
longer depends on nature, it depends on society and how well one takes advantage
of the 'human/social space' vs the 'natural/physical space'.

Nature doesn't create. Humans create from nature.

Most things I as a human interact with daily is intentionally (or
unintentionally) created/shaped by another human or group of humans. My house.
My food. My water. My physical safety. My understanding and view of the world. I
look around my room as I type this on my keyboard, and can see nothing that
doesn't have 'made by human' stamped on it.

I don't live in nature. I live in humanity.

As 'humanity' is the place I live, it is important to _pay attention_ to those
responsible for its creation, maintenance and evolution. Those that create
things humans recognize and use are the ones called 'creators'.

In the modern 'post-nature' era, following and chasing creators is cirital to
survive and thrive as a human. Human creators are the ones creating humanity
itself going forward, only a fool would ignore those responsible for
creating/maintaining their world.

## Winning Strategies

Microsoft and Apple became successful by chasing creators and having those
creators build within their platforms. Google is successful to the degree it
allows creative work to be found. Amazon is successful by providing a
platform/infrastructure allowing the transportation of creative work to flow.

Business today is all about _creating_ platforms and services that _creators_
can _use_ to be _successful themselves_ creating and distributing their
creations.

So the important question to ask is: What does a _creator_ desire/need? The ones
that are better at answering that question will win more creators, and so will
survive and thrive.

## Dark Times Create Opportunities

The stifling of creative freedom is what I believe will mark the present era.

Censorship is rampant as I write these words. It is even to a degree celebrated
and sought after. A natural reaction, no doubt, to the rapid pace of change.
Also a useful tool of maintaining power and control, and so self-perpetuating.

To me living in the present time it feels similar, I imagine, to the times when
human slavery was celebrated as an institution. An 'evil' is wrapped within some
'greater good' (a good trick, and one to be wary of) but the absurdity of the
situation and inherent self-inconsistency makes the world seem 'broken' in a
weird way that obviously can't maintain itself. But it is hard to predict how
long until the inconsistency is resolved.

```
"The stock market can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.‚Äù -- John Maynard Keynes
```

Any form of censorhip is anti-creative, the opposite of create is to censor not
destroy, which itself just creates a new creation of the destroyed thing.

Being 'anti-creative' is a currently popular, but long-term losing strategy.

Anytime there is something popular but fleeting it is possible to 'short sell',
aka benefit by betting on its eventual decline, _if_ one has the patience and
fortitude to stick it out.

Anything that unlocks a new bit of human creativity/expression is IMHO
unstopably powerful. If there is any 'guaranteed winning' strategy, betting on
anything that provides humans with more creative/expressive power is a 'sure
thing' in the long run as far as I can see.

And even if it is a losing strategy in some sense, as a human 'creator' I feel
compelled to bet on increasing human creativity, as it feels like I'm betting on
my own success. It is a bet on the direction I personally _want_ humanity to go.
So even if the bet on human creativity winning somehow 'loses' in any sort of
'survival' sense, I still feel compelled to throw my chips in this direction. My
own personal aesthetic is that I think more creativity/expression is a somehow
'prettier' humanity, vs a less creative/expressive humanity.

I feel opposition to this direction can happen short-term as humans explore, but
the evolutionary stable solution has always been in the direction of anything
that provides greater human creativity, as I read history. So even for pure
survival reasons I think this is a good bet. Maybe that is why in fact I _feel_
like it is a good bet? Nature seems to think 'survival' is a beautiful trait,
and so I'm 'wired' to find this attractive :).

## Decentralization, Centralization, Communication and Privacy

For decades there has been an understanding that decentralization is a key
ingredient to making anything long-term stable, from services to communications
(the internet began as a military defense protocol). Having _multiple_ redundant
providers is important for 'keeping the lights on'.

Centralization and hierarchies are good at speed and efficiency. Businesses,
militaries, and sports teams are pure command and control hierarchies for this
reason. My very body is a command/control system. My hand types these words
without questioning 'why' it is doing it.

The present internet is a combination of centralized and decentralized
protocols. While opposites, centralization and decentralization are clear
winning strategies. At the end of the day winning and being successful is more
important than purity if one wants to survive.

Figuring out the best _combination_ of strategies is where all the action is at.
Few successful artists limit themselves to the use of only one color of paint.

## Emerging Winners

The internet 'won'. It won because it unlocked a torrent of human creativity.
There was resistance to it from the start (remember when the internet was
criticized as only useful for porn? ), but 30 years on, it is clear it will
remain and grow and thrive.

There was a surge of adoption in the late 1990's / early 2000's sometimes called
the 'dot com bubble'.

The internet was around for years before it became 'popular' and useful. There
was a technology that unlocked the internet called the 'browser'. To many no
doubt their browser _is_ the internet.

The browser won because it allowed web 1.0 (static web) to become web 2.0
(interactive web) thus making the internet/web easy and useful for ordinary
people. This led to rapid sudden adoption and so to the 'bubble' which burst
into a deep ocean.

Now is the time for web 3.0 (distributed web).

Like web 2.0 building on top of and retaining all of web 1.0, web 3.0 builds on
top of 2.0 and adds a critical new feature.

The critical feature is _meaningful_ and _easy_ decentralization of the
production, distribution, and transacting of goods and services.

Humans 'broke away' from nature, but of course still live within it. Human
society lives 'on top' of nature.

In a way web 3.0 is humans breaking away from the social institutions that are
no longer useful. Institutions that limit human freedom and creativity will be
among the first to go. But in general, any institution that has become too
focused on serving the institution itself is ripe for transition to the
blockchain. Institutions under this new paradigm now have to _compete_ for
adoption by humans, and competition is what drives increasing quality by and
large.

I feel like we are presently in the 'dot com' era of this new wave of
fundamental human transformation. I don't use those words lightly.

Cities _transformed_ humanity.

The steam engine _transformed_ humanity.

The computer _transformed_ humanity.

The internet _transformed_ humanity.

The decentralized web will also _transform_ humans.

Each transformation builds upon the previous by 'freeing' it in some way from
the shackles of the layer underneath, and providing more 'power' for those
wielding the new tools the transformation provides.

Cities freed us from the brutality of nomadic existence.

The Steam engine (aka heat engine) freed us from human and animal physical
labor.

The computer freed us from having to do all mental calculation inside the human
brain.

The internet freed us from having to communicate to only our immediately
available interlocutors.

The decentralized web will free us from having to ask permission to create.

## Strike While the Iron is Hot

Like previous transformations, the transformation itself happens both quickly
and slowly.

This is because the transformation is a gift that keeps on giving. Cities are
one of the oldest transformations, and even today we continue to find new
creative ways of using them. Same with engines, computers, the internet, etc...

The 'newer' the transformation is the 'hotter' the iron and so the easier it is
to make an impact on it that will be long lasting.

IMHO the temperature of web 3.0 is 'white hot' and the iron is still mostly
liquid, but there are some structures that are begining to form and can be
leveraged and built upon today.

- Blockchain techs. In particular 'smart' blockchains that have an element of
  computation to them. Ethereum is the granddaddy. Like C/Unix It will form the
  pattern others are built on top of. I feel strongly there will continue to be
  many many others to follow, but they will all be strongly influenced in how
  they interface by this project. More 'pure' chains that are good at high
  transaction rates also win. Interoperability between chains, and in general
  reducing transaction costs are going to become increasingly important as
  thousands and millions of chains bloom.

- P2P data transfer techs. IPFS has asserted dominance in this space. It forms
  the underlying infrastructure that allows truly distributed long-term 'static'
  communications. It has potential to be one of the future primary open internet
  protocols like HTTP and SMTP. Its a hidden thing only developers will find
  interest in, but it is a critical piece of the puzzle.

- Platforms built using these above technologies. This is where the everything
  is iron in steam form, not even a liquid. Looking around I see very few
  applications that will remain viable, but many proofs of concepts that are
  indeed proving themselves.

  - Games that are building upon NFTs are such an example. There are several,
    none are particularly compelling, but they are here today and working and
    capturing significant time and attention. They are proving the ecosystem is
    viable and that is enough for what they are.
  - NFTs for digital art. I think the pricing is out of line for all but the
    most seminal works, but there are some gems that are vanguards for the new
    medium.
  - NFTs for supply chain management. Very boring and will be very profitable.
    The first viable B2B usecase.

## Conclusion

If one is creative there has never been a more exciting time to be alive. Get
out there, use the new (or better, combination of new and old) tools being
provided and make something that sings with your soul.

Society is on the verge of a new transformation that will see creatives of all
stripes richly rewarded for their efforts with increasing pace.

If one is looking for business ideas, creating tools and resources that helps
creators create has been, and will increasingly be, a rewarding activity in
itself.

Chase the creators and chase creativity. That is how the humans do.
